---
Title: On Education
Slug: on-education
---

# On Education

Education has always eluded me. Don't get me wrong, I really enjoy
learning, unlearning and relearning. I just think that the "education"
I've had, didn't teach me this.  
  
I've never really been a top achiever. I've never really been the one
whose parents could show him off saying he's achieved top grades in
class. I've never really been the one getting into "enrichment" classes.
I've never been the one who revises before exams; heck I've never
finished studying my portions before the exams. I guess I was really
never meant to be all that.  
  
I've always always been bored of exams. There are some cases in my life
where I've been **so** bored of them that I've chosen to not even write
answers to questions because if I did write them, they would be really
long.  
  
I just finished my MS a while ago and these qualities still stick with
me. So I thought let me take some time and understand myself. Even
through the MS program, I've gotten "D" grades because of, surprise
surprise - boredom. I knew the answers, I was just bored to write them.  
  
Some part of me, realized early enough that these "exams" were at the
end of every semester and that getting good grades in them classified me
under the _Good_ student category and that really didn't parse. Even
as a kid, in retrospect, that was probably the reason for my crappy
performances in them.  
  
I never enjoyed being tested. I've however always enjoyed testing
myself. I think that if someone is looking for a quality in the true
essence of it and if you possess it, they will find it in you.  
  
Even as a kid, I've always loved learning things. I've loved to take
things apart and put them back together. I've always loved to take
seemingly unrelated things, put them together and build a story out of
them (Read: LEGO).  
  
And I think that every kid, has these qualities. Every kid is
inquisitive, it just _needs_ to know what makes that machine work, it
_wants_ to take something shiny apart and find the source of the
shine, it _yearns_ to experience something new. Every kid is curious.
Every kid is daring. Every kid takes risks. Every kid, basically is a
kid.  
  
Education takes this away. In the name of teaching skills to take on the
"world" around them, educations takes from us the very things that made
childhood so fun. In the name of imparting knowledge, education takes
from us the ability to _create_ our own knowledge.  
  
One of the greatest things of mankind is our ability to perceive things
differently, to perceive things as _we_ see fit, to perceive things
from our point of view, to perceive things based on our experiences.  
  
Knowledge has become a single source of truth. It is _preached_ that
if all of us don't have parts of said Knowledge, we are not wise and
that we don't possess what is required to qualify as residents of the
world.  
  
I might even go so far as to say that the only skill that we all need to
share and that needs to live as a single source of truth -- is
communication. Everything else is ones own. In a world as big as ours,
like minded people will find each other and start working on something
that they see fit, that appeals to their perspectives and their
thoughts.  
  
Personally, I feel that knowledge should be distributed. Everyone should
be entitled to his/her own knowledge instead of having a single
Knowledge pool which is supposed to be assimilated. Everyone doesn't
look at a given object in the same way; we seem to be forgetting that
simple fact of life and everyone is forced to think in a single way when
fundamentally we are all different people.  
  
If nothing, this seems to be like a propaganda. Like there is some sort
of conspiracy behind the whole idea of "education".  
  
Schools and Colleges have become but a business. _Extracting_ money
from the parents of the kids in order to impart this said Knowledge. In
order to make them "ready" for the world around them.  
  
However there seems to be some places that get this. That understand
that teaching is less about _telling_ them that 1+1=2 and more about
making them _synthesize_ this information and ask questions about it.  
  
Asking questions, should primarily be the goal of teaching. This quality
seems to be the **first** thing that is _stolen_ from the kids. Most
teachers encourage kids to ask questions but don't practice it
themselves. Teaching, much like management of schools and colleges has
also become a business. Teachers teach because it is a 9-3 job and pays
decently. There are very few teachers who teach because they love to do
it. They fail to understand what a great power they hold, a power to
guide an entire generation, a power to **create** change.  
  
I believe the psychology of kids and the way they think is very simple.
They follow. That is all there is to it. They tend to look up to people
and follow what they do. The simplest example of this is the way they
learn to speak their mother tongue - simply by listening and following
the lip movements of their parents. Guidance is essential, but the
initiator is simple - The need to follow.  
  
We need to understand this and cultivate it. We as teachers shouldn't
**tell** our students to do something. We need to **show** them that
that is the right thing to do, by doing it ourselves. When they see us
doing something, they will also follow it.  
  
To me, that is how education should be. It should be more about
motivating the kids to do something that they want to do instead of
something that we think they are good at. And they will only find out
what they are good at when they ask questions about themselves and about
the world around them. In our journey to impart education to our younger
generations, this is something we are obligated to teach.  
  
So what happens if we don't do these things?  
Nothing really drastic. Some kids will realize these things soon enough
and reacting on it. The only problem are the timelines. When they could
have gotten this realization eons ago, why delay it? Kids are the next
generation, they are the next change. When we have the opportunity to
influence this change early enough why shouldn't we do it? The state our
country is in right now, we could use change. We could use the next
generation. We could use some questions.  
  
So let us teach them. Let us teach them to assimilate. Let us teach them
to analyze. Let us teach them to object. Let us teach them to learn. Let
us teach them to teach. Let us teach them to travel. Let us teach them
to experience. Let us teach them to love. Let us teach them happiness.
Let us teach them to fail. Let us teach them to help others. Let us
teach them to care. Let us teach them humanity. Let us teach them to
look beyond boundaries. Let us teach them to look beyond our world. Let
us teach them to look beyond religion. Let us teach them about
sacrifice. Let us teach them to not lie. Let us teach them to live up to
their word. Let us teach them anything we can. Let us teach them
everything we can.  
  
But first, Let us learn these things. Let us teach them, by teaching
ourselves.  
  
That to me, is education.
